---
layout: default
title: Inter Process Communication
category: backpages
---

> [Rust std misc][1]

[1]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/std_misc.html

# IPC
## Network
+ __Socket__
  
  Data sent over a network interface, either to a different process on the same computer or to another computer on the network. Stream-oriented (TCP; data written through a socket requires formatting to preserve message boundaries) or more rarely message-oriented (UDP, SCTP).

## Process
+ __Pipe__
  
  __A unidirectional data channel__. Data written to the write end of the pipe is buffered by the operating system until it is read from the read end of the pipe. Two-way data streams between processes can be achieved by creating two pipes utilizing standard input and output.
  
  > A traditional pipe is "unnamed" and lasts only as long as the process. A named pipe, however, can last as long as the system is up, beyond the life of the process. It can be deleted if no longer used. Usually a named pipe appears as a file, and generally processes attach to it for IPC.

+ __Signal__
  
  A system message sent from one __process__ to another, not usually used to transfer data but instead used to __remotely command__ the partnered process.
  
+ __Shared memory__
  
  Using memory for communication inside a single program, e.g. among its __multiple threads__, is also referred to as shared memory.  
  
+ __Message queue__
  
  A data stream similar to a socket, but which usually preserves message boundaries. Typically implemented by the operating system, they allow __multiple processes__ to read and write to the message queue without being directly connected to each other.

+ __Message passing__
  
  In computer science, message passing is a technique for invoking behavior (i.e., running a program) on a computer. The invoking program __sends a message to a process__ (which may be an actor or object) and relies on the process and the supporting infrastructure to select and invoke the actual code to run. Message passing differs from conventional programming where a process, subroutine, or function is directly invoked by name. Message passing is key to some models of concurrency and object-oriented programming.

## Disk
+ __File__
  
  A record stored on __disk__, or a record synthesized on demand by a file server, which can be accessed by multiple processes.
  
+ __Named pipe - FIFO__
  
  A pipe implemented through a __file__ on the file system instead of standard input and output. Multiple processes can read and write to the file as a buffer for IPC data.

+ __Memory-mapped file__
  
  A file mapped to RAM and can be modified by changing memory addresses directly instead of outputting to a stream. This shares the same benefits as a standard __file__.

+ __Unix domain socket__
  
  Similar to an internet socket but all communication occurs within the kernel. Domain sockets use the __file system__ as their address space. Processes reference a domain socket as an inode, and multiple processes can communicate with one socket

